He was up again in a moment, and with convulsive strength he seized Holmes
  by the throat; but I struck him on the head with the butt of my revolver and
  he dropped again upon the floor. I fell upon him, and as I held him my
  comrade blew a shrill call upon a whistle. There was the clatter of running
  feet upon the pavement, and two policemen in uniform, with one plain-clothes
  detective, rushed through the front entrance and into the room.
 "That you, Lestrade?" said Holmes.
 "Yes, Mr. Holmes. I took the job myself. It's good to see you back in
  London, sir."
 "I think you want a little unofficial help. Three undetected murders in
  one year won't do, Lestrade. But you handled the Molesey Mystery with less
  than your usual—that's to say, you handled it fairly well."
 We had all risen to our feet, our prisoner breathing hard, with a stalwart
  constable on each side of him. Already a few loiterers had begun to collect
  in the street. Holmes stepped up to the window, closed it, and dropped the
  blinds. Lestrade had produced two candles and the policemen had uncovered
  their lanterns. I was able at last to have a good look at our prisoner.
 It was a tremendously virile and yet sinister face which was turned
  towards us. With the brow of a philosopher above and the jaw of a sensualist
  below, the man must have started with great capacities for good or for evil.
  But one could not look upon his cruel blue eyes, with their drooping, cynical
  lids, or upon the fierce, aggressive nose and the threatening, deep-lined
  brow, without reading Nature's plainest danger-signals. He took no heed of
  any of us, but his eyes were fixed upon Holmes's face with an expression in
  which hatred and amazement were equally blended. "You fiend!" he kept on
  muttering. "You clever, clever fiend!"
 "Ah, Colonel!" said Holmes, arranging his rumpled collar; "'journeys end
  in lovers' meetings,' as the old play says. I don't think I have had the
  pleasure of seeing you since you favoured me with those attentions as I lay
  on the ledge above the Reichenbach Fall."
 The Colonel still stared at my friend like a man in a trance. "You
  cunning, cunning fiend!" was all that he could say.
 "I have not introduced you yet," said Holmes. "This, gentlemen, is Colonel
  Sebastian Moran, once of Her Majesty's Indian Army, and the best heavy game
  shot that our Eastern Empire has ever produced. I believe I am correct,
  Colonel, in saying that your bag of tigers still remains unrivalled?"
 The fierce old man said nothing, but still glared at my companion; with
  his savage eyes and bristling moustache he was wonderfully like a tiger
  himself.
 "I wonder that my very simple stratagem could deceive so old a shikari,"
  said Holmes. "It must be very familiar to you. Have you not tethered a young
  kid under a tree, lain above it with your rifle, and waited for the bait to
  bring up your tiger? This empty house is my tree and you are my tiger. You
  have possibly had other guns in reserve in case there should be several
  tigers, or in the unlikely supposition of your own aim failing you. These,"
  he pointed around, "are my other guns. The parallel is exact."



 Colonel Moran sprang forward, with a snarl of rage, but the constables
  dragged him back. The fury upon his face was terrible to look at.
 "I confess that you had one small surprise for me," said Holmes. "I did
  not anticipate that you would yourself make use of this empty house and this
  convenient front window. I had imagined you as operating from the street,
  where my friend Lestrade and his merry men were awaiting you. With that
  exception all has gone as I expected."
 Colonel Moran turned to the official detective.
 "You may or may not have just cause for arresting me," said he, "but at
  least there can be no reason why I should submit to the gibes of this person.
  If I am in the hands of the law let things be done in a legal way."
 "Well, that's reasonable enough," said Lestrade. "Nothing further you have
  to say, Mr. Holmes, before we go?"
 Holmes had picked up the powerful air-gun from the floor and was examining
  its mechanism.
 "An admirable and unique weapon," said he, "noiseless and of tremendous
  power. I knew Von Herder, the blind German mechanic, who constructed it to
  the order of the late Professor Moriarty. For years I have been aware of its
  existence, though I have never before had the opportunity of handling it. I
  commend it very specially to your attention, Lestrade, and also the bullets
  which fit it."
 "You can trust us to look after that, Mr. Holmes," said Lestrade, as the
  whole party moved towards the door. "Anything further to say?"
 "Only to ask what charge you intend to prefer?"
 "What charge, sir? Why, of course, the attempted murder of Mr. Sherlock
  Holmes."
 "Not so, Lestrade. I do not propose to appear in the matter at all. To
  you, and to you only, belongs the credit of the remarkable arrest which you
  have effected. Yes, Lestrade, I congratulate you! With your usual happy
  mixture of cunning and audacity you have got him."
 "Got him! Got whom, Mr. Holmes?"
 "The man that the whole force has been seeking in vain—Colonel
  Sebastian Moran, who shot the Honourable Ronald Adair with an expanding
  bullet from an air-gun through the open window of the second-floor front of
  No. 427, Park Lane, upon the 30th of last month. That's the charge, Lestrade.
  And now, Watson, if you can endure the draught from a broken window, I think
  that half an hour in my study over a cigar may afford you some profitable
  amusement."
 Our old chambers had been left unchanged through the supervision of
  Mycroft Holmes and the immediate care of Mrs. Hudson. As I entered I saw, it
  is true, an unwonted tidiness, but the old landmarks were all in their place.
  There were the chemical corner and the acid-stained, deal-topped table. There
  upon a shelf was the row of formidable scrap-books and books of reference
  which many of our fellow-citizens would have been so glad to burn. The
  diagrams, the violin-case, and the pipe-rack—even the Persian slipper
  which contained the tobacco—all met my eyes as I glanced round me.
  There were two occupants of the room—one Mrs. Hudson, who beamed upon
  us both as we entered; the other the strange dummy which had played so
  important a part in the evening's adventures. It was a wax-coloured model of
  my friend, so admirably done that it was a perfect facsimile. It stood on a
  small pedestal table with an old dressing-gown of Holmes's so draped round it
  that the illusion from the street was absolutely perfect.
 "I hope you preserved all precautions, Mrs. Hudson?" said Holmes.
 "I went to it on my knees, sir, just as you told me."
 "Excellent. You carried the thing out very well. Did you observe where the
  bullet went?"
 "Yes, sir. I'm afraid it has spoilt your beautiful bust, for it passed
  right through the head and flattened itself on the wall. I picked it up from
  the carpet. Here it is!"
 Holmes held it out to me. "A soft revolver bullet, as you perceive,
  Watson. There's genius in that, for who would expect to find such a thing
  fired from an air-gun. All right, Mrs. Hudson, I am much obliged for your
  assistance. And now, Watson, let me see you in your old seat once more, for
  there are several points which I should like to discuss with you."
 He had thrown off the seedy frock-coat, and now he was the Holmes of old
  in the mouse-coloured dressing-gown which he took from his effigy.
 "The old shikari's nerves have not lost their steadiness nor his eyes
  their keenness," said he, with a laugh, as he inspected the shattered
  forehead of his bust.
 "Plumb in the middle of the back of the head and smack through the brain.
  He was the best shot in India, and I expect that there are few better in
  London. Have you heard the name?"
 "No, I have not."
 "Well, well, such is fame! But, then, if I remember aright, you had not
  heard the name of Professor James Moriarty, who had one of the great brains
  of the century. Just give me down my index of biographies from the
  shelf."
 He turned over the pages lazily, leaning back in his chair and blowing
  great clouds from his cigar.



 "My collection of M's is a fine one," said he. "Moriarty himself is enough
  to make any letter illustrious, and here is Morgan the poisoner, and Merridew
  of abominable memory, and Mathews, who knocked out my left canine in the
  waiting-room at Charing Cross, and, finally, here is our friend of
  to-night."
 He handed over the book, and I read:—
 "MORAN, SEBASTIAN, COLONEL. Unemployed. Formerly 1st
  Bengalore Pioneers. Born London, 1840. Son of Sir Augustus Moran, C.B., once
  British Minister to Persia. Educated Eton and Oxford. Served in Jowaki
  Campaign, Afghan Campaign, Charasiab (despatches), Sherpur, and Cabul. Author
  of 'Heavy Game of the Western Himalayas,' 1881; 'Three Months in the Jungle,'
  1884. Address: Conduit Street. Clubs: The Anglo-Indian, the Tankerville, the
  Bagatelle Card Club."
 On the margin was written, in Holmes's precise hand::—
 "The second most dangerous man in London."
 "This is astonishing," said I, as I handed back the volume. "The man's
  career is that of an honourable soldier."
 "It is true," Holmes answered. "Up to a certain point he did well. He was
  always a man of iron nerve, and the story is still told in India how he
  crawled down a drain after a wounded man-eating tiger. There are some trees,
  Watson, which grow to a certain height and then suddenly develop some
  unsightly eccentricity. You will see it often in humans. I have a theory that
  the individual represents in his development the whole procession of his
  ancestors, and that such a sudden turn to good or evil stands for some strong
  influence which came into the line of his pedigree. The person becomes, as it
  were, the epitome of the history of his own family."
 "It is surely rather fanciful."
 "Well, I don't insist upon it. Whatever the cause, Colonel Moran began to
  go wrong. Without any open scandal he still made India too hot to hold him.
  He retired, came to London, and again acquired an evil name. It was at this
  time that he was sought out by Professor Moriarty, to whom for a time he was
  chief of the staff. Moriarty supplied him liberally with money and used him
  only in one or two very high-class jobs which no ordinary criminal could have
  undertaken. You may have some recollection of the death of Mrs. Stewart, of
  Lauder, in 1887. Not? Well, I am sure Moran was at the bottom of it; but
  nothing could be proved. So cleverly was the Colonel concealed that even when
  the Moriarty gang was broken up we could not incriminate him. You remember at
  that date, when I called upon you in your rooms, how I put up the shutters
  for fear of air-guns? No doubt you thought me fanciful. I knew exactly what I
  was doing, for I knew of the existence of this remarkable gun, and I knew
  also that one of the best shots in the world would be behind it. When we were
  in Switzerland he followed us with Moriarty, and it was undoubtedly he who
  gave me that evil five minutes on the Reichenbach ledge.
 "You may think that I read the papers with some attention during my
  sojourn in France, on the look-out for any chance of laying him by the heels.
  So long as he was free in London my life would really not have been worth
  living. Night and day the shadow would have been over me, and sooner or later
  his chance must have come. What could I do? I could not shoot him at sight,
  or I should myself be in the dock. There was no use appealing to a
  magistrate. They cannot interfere on the strength of what would appear to
  them to be a wild suspicion. So I could do nothing. But I watched the
  criminal news, knowing that sooner or later I should get him. Then came the
  death of this Ronald Adair. My chance had come at last! Knowing what I did,
  was it not certain that Colonel Moran had done it? He had played cards with
  the lad; he had followed him home from the club; he had shot him through the
  open window. There was not a doubt of it. The bullets alone are enough to put
  his head in a noose. I came over at once. I was seen by the sentinel, who
  would, I knew, direct the Colonel's attention to my presence. He could not
  fail to connect my sudden return with his crime and to be terribly alarmed. I
  was sure that he would make an attempt to get me out of the way  at
  once , and would bring round his murderous weapon for that purpose. I left
  him an excellent mark in the window, and, having warned the police that they
  might be needed—by the way, Watson, you spotted their presence in that
  doorway with unerring accuracy—I took up what seemed to me to be a
  judicious post for observation, never dreaming that he would choose the same
  spot for his attack. Now, my dear Watson, does anything remain for me to
  explain?"
 "Yes," said I. "You have not made it clear what was Colonel Moran's motive
  in murdering the Honourable Ronald Adair."
 "Ah! my dear Watson, there we come into those realms of conjecture where
  the most logical mind may be at fault. Each may form his own hypothesis upon
  the present evidence, and yours is as likely to be correct as mine."
 "You have formed one, then?"
 "I think that it is not difficult to explain the facts. It came out in
  evidence that Colonel Moran and young Adair had between them won a
  considerable amount of money. Now, Moran undoubtedly played foul—of
  that I have long been aware. I believe that on the day of the murder Adair
  had discovered that Moran was cheating. Very likely he had spoken to him
  privately, and had threatened to expose him unless he voluntarily resigned
  his membership of the club and promised not to play cards again. It is
  unlikely that a youngster like Adair would at once make a hideous scandal by
  exposing a well-known man so much older than himself. Probably he acted as I
  suggest. The exclusion from his clubs would mean ruin to Moran, who lived by
  his ill-gotten card gains. He therefore murdered Adair, who at the time was
  endeavouring to work out how much money he should himself return, since he
  could not profit by his partner's foul play. He locked the door lest the
  ladies should surprise him and insist upon knowing what he was doing with
  these names and coins. Will it pass?"
 "I have no doubt that you have hit upon the truth."
 "It will be verified or disproved at the trial. Meanwhile, come what may,
  Colonel Moran will trouble us no more, the famous air-gun of Von Herder will
  embellish the Scotland Yard Museum, and once again Mr. Sherlock Holmes is
  free to devote his life to examining those interesting little problems which
  the complex life of London so plentifully presents."
